---
layout: post
title:  "clojure.spec for functions by example"
date:   2017-10-15 12:00:00
tags:   clojure spec fspec fdef
---

Clojure.spec for functions by example: their inputs, outputs, and the relationships between them. Updated 9/6/2018.

## Simple Input & Output

We have a simple function that takes a single argument and returns a set:
```clojure
(defn digits
  "Takes just an int and returns the set of its digit characters."
  [just-an-int]
  (into #{} (str just-an-int)))
```

Function specs are typically defined with `s/fdef`. Let's provide a spec for the arguments:
```clojure
(s/fdef digits :args (s/cat :just-an-int int?))
```
Function argument lists can be spec'd with `s/cat`, treating the arguments as a tagged concatenation or sequence. (If you think about it, `defn` function arguments are just a vector, man.) Here we only have one argument and we want it to be an integer. Note that the function's argument names and the keywords used to describe them in the `s/cat` spec do not have to match, though they do in this example.

We can now `instrument` the function to assert calls against its `:args` spec:
```clojure
(stest/instrument `digits)
```

This only covers the function's _inputs_. We can also spec the return value:
```clojure
(s/fdef digits
        :args (s/cat :just-an-int int?)
        :ret (s/coll-of char? :kind set? :min-count 1))
```
With a `:ret` spec, we can now `check` the function against our spec with generative tests:
```clojure
(stest/check `digits)
```

## Keyword Arguments

There's a `s/keys*` macro that works for kwargs, similarly to how `s/keys` works for maps.

```clojure
(defn big-fun
  [why where & {:keys [which-what which what]}]
  (format "%s %s %s %s %s" why where which-what which what))

(s/fdef big-fun
        :args (s/cat :why #(instance? LocalDateTime %)
                     :where string?
                     :kwargs (s/keys* :req-un [(or ::which-what
                                                   (and ::which ::what))])))

(stest/instrument `big-fun)
(big-fun (LocalDateTime/now) "My Place" :which 1 :what 4) ;; valid
(big-fun (LocalDateTime/now) "My Place" :which-what nil)  ;; also valid
```
Here we defined a kwargs spec that requires either a `:which-what` key _or_ a `:which` key and `:what` key, just like we could've done for a map.

## Multi-arity & Variadic Functions

We can spec multi-arity functions using `s/alt` to define the alternate cases, and variadic functions using `s/*`. Here's a function with two fixed arities and one variadic arity:
```clojure
(defn such-arity
  ([] "nullary")
  ([one] "unary")
  ([one two & many] "one two many"))

(s/fdef such-arity
        :args (s/alt :nullary (s/cat)
                     :unary (s/cat :one any?)
                     :variadic (s/cat :one any?
                                      :two any?
                                      :many (s/* any?))))
```
We can spec the zero-arity with `(s/cat)`; no arguments. We specify the variadic arguments with `s/*`. The "regex" specs _compose_ to match a single sequence. This composition of `s/cat` and `s/*` produces a spec that wants a sequence of two arguments and then _any number_ of additional arguments.

## Higher-Order Functions

This is an only slightly different, more involved example than [the one in the clojure.spec guide](https://clojure.org/guides/spec#_higher_order_functions).

Here's a spec for a function that takes _any_ two arguments and returns one of them:
```clojure
(s/def ::pick-fn
  (s/with-gen
    (s/fspec :args (s/cat :a any? :b any?)
             :ret any?
             :fn #(or (= (:ret %) (:a (:args %)))
                      (= (:ret %) (:b (:args %)))))
    #(gen/return (fn [a b] (rand-nth [a b])))))
```
This function spec is registered to a qualified keyword rather than a function symbol via `s/fdef`. This is defined with `s/def` and `s/fspec` because I want to use this function spec in more than one place, and specify a custom generator. Notice the additional `:fn` spec that asserts the returned value is one of the input values. This spec will be checked when we `check` the function with generative tests.

I use `s/with-gen` to specify a custom generator that returns a function that returns one of its arguments randomly. I could however just allow spec to create a function generator from my function spec; the generated functions would return random samples of its `:ret` spec, and any calls would have their arguments asserted against its `:args` spec. A spec-generated function would not be desirable in this contrived example because we want to ensure the function always returns something it was given.

How about this for some implementation of `::pick-fn`:
```clojure
(defn battle
  "Returns the victor."
  [contestant-1 contestant-2]
  (if (even? (System/nanoTime)) contestant-1 contestant-2))
```
Now I want to associate the `::pick-fn` spec with `battle` function. We can achieve the same effect as `(s/fdef battle ...)` with `s/def`:
```clojure
(s/def battle ::pick-fn)
(stest/instrument `battle)
(stest/check `battle)
```

Now let's write a higher-order function to take a `::pick-fn`-conformant function and a collection:
```clojure
(defn winners
  "Uses f to pick a successor between each element of coll, returning sequence of successors."
  [f coll]
  (rest (reductions f coll)))
(winners battle (range 20))
;;=> (0 0 0 0 4 4 6 6 6 6 10 10 10 10 14 14 14 14 14 19)
```
And a spec for the function:
```clojure
(s/fdef winners
        :args (s/cat :f ::pick-fn
                     :coll (s/coll-of any? :min-count 2))
        :ret coll?
        :fn (fn [{:keys [args ret]}]
              (and (= (count ret) (dec (count (:coll args))))
                   (set/subset? (set ret) (set (:coll args))))))
(stest/instrument `winners)
(stest/check `winners)
```

The `winners` function has some odd invariants. The `f` arg must conform to `::pick-fn` and `coll` must have at least two elements. Additionally, the relationship between inputs and outputs for `winners` is expressed in the `:fn` spec:
1. It should always return a collection that has one less element than the input collection. This is because the first "pick" is for the first two input elements.
2. The returned elements should be a subset of the input elements.

### Warning

Any function `g` you pass into a higher-order, instrumented function `f` may be invoked multiple times as spec tests its conformance! This might be a problem if `g` is expensive or has side effects.
```clojure
(defn f [g] (g 1))
(s/fdef f :args (s/cat :g (s/fspec :args (s/tuple int?))))
(st/instrument `f)
```

Now if we call `f` with a side-effecting function (printing text) we can see the given function invoked many times with random inputs — a sort of miniature quick-check.
```clojure
(f #(doto % prn inc))
-1
0
-2
...
59
-69770
-1165
1
=> 1
```

#### Possible Workarounds

Simplify the higher-order function's spec:
```clojure
(s/fdef f :args (s/cat :g ifn?))
```

Or disable the behavior using a dynamic binding in spec:
```clojure
(binding [clojure.spec.alpha/*fspec-iterations* 0]
  (f #(doto % prn inc)))
1
=> 1
```

## Run-time Checking

### Instrumentation

You can call `instrument` with no arguments to instrument all loaded/instrumentable vars, and you may want to do this at dev/test time but not in production to avoid performance penalties. One convenient solution is to have a separate dev/test entrypoint in your program that calls `instrument` after the relevant namespaces are loaded. Another option with Leinengen is to use `:injections` in your `project.clj` under specific profile(s):
```clojure
:injections [(require 'lib.core) ;; all instrumented fns should be loaded here
             (require 'clojure.spec.test.alpha)
             (clojure.spec.test.alpha/instrument)]
```

Spec's `instrument` only checks function inputs (`:args` specs). Alternatively, the [Orchestra](https://github.com/jeaye/orchestra) library has a drop-in replacement that also checks `:ret` and `:fn` specs.

### `:pre` and `:post` checks

This will throw an `AssertionError` if called with any non-nil, non-string value:
```clojure
(defn stringer-bell
  "Prints a string and rings bell."
  [s]
  {:pre [(s/valid? (s/nilable string?) s)]}
  (println s "\007"))
```

### Asserting

There's also `s/assert` which can be used in function bodies:
```clojure
(defn stringer-bell [s]
  (s/assert (s/nilable string?) s)
  (println s "\007"))
```
You need to enable spec's off-by-default assertion checking for this to have an effect:
```clojure
(s/check-asserts true)
```
`s/assert` will throw a more detailed exception than a `:pre`/`:post` condition, although be careful not to use `s/assert` there: it returns valid values and if the spec allows nil, the condition will fail when a valid nil is passed.
